Cooper Park is an urban park in Brooklyn, New York. It is located between Maspeth Ave, Sharon Street, Olive Street, and Morgan Avenue In East Williamsburg. It was established in 1895, and covers 6.40 Acres.
Cooper Park was once the sight of an old glue factory owned by American industrialist Peter Cooper. He started his glue business in Kips Bay, Manhattan in 1821. In 1838, he moved his business from Kips Bay to Maspeth Avenue in Brooklyn. Cooper retired from the glue business in 1838 and sold the factory to his family members. In 1878, the business left Maspeth Avenue, and eventually left Brooklyn for good in the 20th Century. In 1895, Cooper's family sold the site of the Maspeth Avenue factory to The City of Brooklyn for $55,000. From there, the site was cleared and became Cooper Park.
The main attractions of the park include a dog run and the Carnegie Playground. There is also a variety of sports facilities: 2 basketball courts, 4 handball courts, 2 tennis courts, 2 volleyball courts, and a skate park. A public bathroom and spray shower are present as well.
In 1821, Peter Cooper purchased a glue factory in Kips Bay Manhattan to manufacture high-quality glue products. In 1838, he relocated the factory to Maspeth Avenue in Brooklyn. It was a strategic site that could access roads connecting to New York-bound ferries and Long Island farms. When Cooper retired from the glue business in 1865, he sold the factory to his family members. In 1878, the factory moved again to Smith Island in Newtown Creek. It eventually left Brooklyn for good in the 20th century. In 1895, the descendants of Peter Cooper sold the site glue factory on Maspeth Avenue to The City of Brooklyn for $55,000. From there, the City would clear out the site and build Cooper Park.
In 1898, Cooper Park showed evidence of a lack of nourishing soil. That year, a contract was entered to supply the park with one thousand cubic yards of soil. Additionally, the pathways of the park were re-paved with asphalt tiles, replacing the former walkways that were composed of cinder and gravel.
In 1906, The City of New York started construction on a shelter house at Cooper Park. They contracted L. E. Brown for the work and materials required for its construction. They also contracted Dodge & Morrison for their architectural services.
In 1920, Cooper park underwent a series of renovations. These renovations include repaired plumbing, repaired electrical work, and repaired irrigation systems. On that year, the appraised property value of the park was $140,000.
In November 2017, a group of Brooklyn citizens formed a new group called the Friends of Cooper Park. This group collaborates on developing ideas to sustain the park. They primarily brainstorm ideas on ways to keep the park clean, and keep up with the landscaping of the park.
Cooper Park covers 6.40 Acres in Northern Brooklyn. To the north of the park lies the town of Greenpoint, to the east of the park lies the Newtown Creek, and to the west of the park lies the neighborhood of WIlliamsburg. Next to the park, there's an affordable housing complex owned by the New York Housing Authority named Cooper Park Houses, and there's a Homeless Shelter named The Barbara Kleinmen residence.
Cooper Park contains a variety of recreation facilities available to the public. It features 2 basketball courts, 4 handball courts, 2 tennis courts, 2 volleyball courts, a playground, and a skate park.
The Cooper Park Basketball Courts requires a permit for use. Those who are under 18 may obtain a permit for free, but those who are over 18 are required to purchase one. Organized leagues and special events must purchase a permit as well.
The Cooper Park Tennis Courts requires a permit for use. Adults under the age of 61 must purchase a seasonal permit for $100. Seniors and minors are eligible for discounts. Permits and reservations can be done online.
The Cooper Park Dog Run is a large, fenced-in area where dogs can exercise unleashed during park hours.
The playground in Cooper Park is named Carnegie Playground. It was named after Margaret Carnegie. It has been reported to have acceptable conditions, the majority of the time, throughout the past decade by the Parks Inspection Program (PIP).
Cooper Park is managed by the New York City Department of Parks & Recreation.
Coordinates: 40°42′57″N 73°56′15″W﻿ / ﻿40.7159°N 73.9374°W﻿ / 40.7159; -73.9374
