Deathbringer is a Belarusian progressive technical death metal band formed in 2002 by guitarist Artyom Serdyuk.
The idea to form a progressive death metal band was born in January 2001 and belongs to the guitarist Artyom Serdyuk. The basic line-up was formed in May 2002. During all this period of time Artyom Serdyuk has been working under material for the future band and participating in different side-projects. In the end of 2001 he met the drummer Vitaly Zmey Silyuk. For some time together they have been playing covers of such bands as: Sepultura, Slayer, Machine Head, etc., and also form a thrash-death metal band Scrutator Animarum with Vasily Martyushenko as a bass guitarist and vocalist.
In spring 2002, Artyom Serdyuk met the bass guitarist Valery Poznyak and vocalist Mitry Molochnikoff. The idea finally took its shape, but the band could not find a second guitarist.
The decision of the band to play several covers of Death coincided with the idea of Belarusian label Hangar 18 to issue a Tribute to Chuck Schuldiner. In the end of June 2002 Deathbringer entered the studio and during five days recorded three covers: Without Judgement, Crystal Mountain and Voice of the Soul. But after several months it turned out that this tribute wouldn't see the light at all.
By April 2003 the band had finished working under material and entered the studio to record the debut album. Meanwhile, the question about the 2nd guitarist was still actual, and to their first concert in May 2003 Deathbringer invited a session guitar player Sergey Kovalenkov.
By the beginning of 2004 the band had come to a stop in the recording, because of the low quality of the equipment in the studio. Deathbringer managed to record only one track Keeper of Pain, which they used as a promo.
The band concentrates on the concert activity. On 27 May 2003 for the first time they appeared beyond the bounds of their native town Grodno in Massa Brutto fest 4 in Minsk with the bands like: Divina Enema, Rasta, Evthanasia, Imprudence, Ossuary, Sontsevorot and Dying Rose.
28 December 2003- Deathbringer appeared in Snowstorm 2004 in Minsk with the bands: Devilyn (Poland), Sufferer, Chemical Warfare, Tweed.
In 2004 annual festivals and gigs in their native town took place, and the final line-up was formed, consisting of Artyom Serdyuk and Sergey "Sedoy" Kovalenkov on guitars, Mitry Molochnikoff on vocals, Vitaly "Zmey" Silyuk on drums, and Valery Poznyak on bass guitar.
29 April 2004 a concert of Vader was held in Minsk as a part of their Battles in the East tour 2004. The support was as following: Everlost (Russia), Deathbringer, Sufferer, Veld.
11 October 2004 the band together with Mental Demise (Ukraine) and Spawn of Possession (Sweden) was supposed to support Cannibal Corpse in Minsk, but due to some internal or external reasons The Ministry of Culture of the Republic of Belarus canceled the concert half an hour before the show.
28 November Deathbringer's 2-hour solo concert Alive in Pain took place in Grodno, with the support of Prophetic Dream and Iratus Dominus.
Despite the concert activity in spring summer 2004 the band managed to record a new Death cover Trapped in a Corner specially for A Tribute to Death - Underground, in which bands from Russia, Ukraine and Belarus participated, and which was issued by the Russian label Under Black Water at the beginning of 2005.
In summer 2004 Deathbringer on their own released a single Keeper of Pain, and in autumn a bootleg with demo and live recordings Circle of What Was.
At the beginning of 2005 (12 March) in Gomel a concert of Behemoth (Poland) and Neolith (Poland) took place (unfortunately Behemoth refused to play, due to inferior quality of organization). The support was as following: Veld, Deathbringer, Kamaedzitca, Vestibulum, Black Sugar, Thelema.
Then followed: a gig in Minsk on 10 April (together with Deathbringer appeared: Posthumous Blasphemer, Kamaedzitca, Iratus Dominus, Straightland, Endless Grief, Inner Resistance, Psychopatic Noise); appearance in Brest with Rasta, Frodmortell, Dream 664.
24 May 2005 the band organized a concert of Devilyn (Poland) in Grodno with the next support: Deathbringer, Vestibulum, Faithless Mind and Iratus Dominus.
In August 2005 Deathbringer went to Olsztyn (Poland) and entered Studio-X, where they, again, from the very beginning started recording their debut album Homo Divisus. Sound engineer Szymon Czech (Nyia, Third Degree), who is known for his work with the bands like: Dies Irae, Sceptic, Yattering, Enter Chaos, Panzer X (Peter's (Vader) project), etc. worked under it. As a guest musician here appeared Jacek Hiro (Sceptic, Dies Irae, Virgin Snatch). The recording session was divided into 2 sections: August 2005 and September 2005.
4 October next gig in Grodno where Deathbringer appeared together with Veld and Hyperion (Ukraine) 
18 November 2005 the band performed together with Parricide, Toxic Bonkers, Abnormyndeffect, Disentomb, Stickoxydal and Anal Grind in Massa Brutto fest 7 (Brutalorgy) in Minsk.
At the beginning of 2006 the band returned to Studio-X to do the mixing and the mastering of the album. 
During 2006 Deathbringer appeared in different gigs and shared the scene with the bands like: Luna Ad Noctum, Rasta, Nightside Glance, Iratus Dominus, etc.
3 October 2006 the first concert in Poland together with Sceptic, Thy Disease and Rasta.
16 June 2007. Deathbringer performed at Rock Transmission Festival in Goldap (Poland), together with Frontside, At The Lake, Empatic, Othermind, Nitro Charge, Prafuria. They took the second place, the Audience Choice Award and awards for "best guitarist", "best drummer" and "best bassist".
In November 2007, the album Homo Divisus was released by Sound Age Productions (Moscow) and Deathbringer promototed it on Rebel Angels Tour 2007 Vol.2 with Hate, Crionics and Vedonist.

The album was very well-received and got really positive opinions and reviews from all over the world from different metal magazines, webzines and metal portals.
In 2008 2 more tours took place: in Belarus - Creative Breath Of Death Tour 2008 alongside Katalepsy, Psilocybe Larvae and Thelema; and first tour as a headliner in Poland - Heads Reaping Tour 2008 with Empatic.
In the first half of 2009 Deathbringer went on the next polish headlining tour, and also performed in Grodno together with Psilocybe Larvae, Serdce, Inner Resistance, etc. 
On May 1 the band appeared on the Metal Marathon 3 Festival in St. Petersburg, with Psilocybe Larvae, Stalwart, Inside You, Melissa, etc.

The next line-up change took place: 
Valery was replaced by Alexander Goron (Amentia, Posthumous Blasphemer), and the place of Ilya took Nikodem Ciesluk.
The first gig in such line-up took place on 29 August in Goldap (Poland), where Deathbringer appeared on the same stage with the polish metal legend Kat.
In 2010 album Homo Divisus was re-released by MSR Productions (Moscow).



And in the Spring of 2010 the band went on “Spreading Humanicide Tour 2010” in Poland, Belarus and Lithuania alongside Sceptic, Abused Majesty and Sinful Carrion, and with a special guest star on the show in Minsk – Marduk.
