Mike Wolfer is a comic book writer and artist. 
Wolfer was a huge fan of horror and comics as a child, and after high school he attended The Kubert School for two years.
He started his career in 1987 by forming his own publishing company, Ground Zero Comics, and self-published "Daikazu" (8 issues) and "Daikazu Vs. Gugoron" (3 issues).
In 1992, Wolfer began publishing "Widow," an erotic horror title which ran a total of 14 issues, through various mini-series: "Widow: Flesh And Blood," "Widow: Kill Me Again," "Widow: Metal Gypsies," and "Widow: Bound By Blood." Simultaneously, Wolfer began freelancing with other companies such as Dark Horse Comics ("Dark Horse Presents," "Godzilla"), London Night Studios ("Razor"), Chaos! Comics ("Lady Death Swimsuit/Lingerie"), Revisionary Press, and others.
As they formed their initial line-up of comics in 1996, new publisher Avatar Press incorporated "Widow" into their line-up and began reprinting the old Ground Zero Comics work as "Widow X," while also publishing new Widow material.
Wolfer soon began writing and illustrating many of Avatar's most popular titles, collaborating with many renowned writers including Warren Ellis, Garth Ennis and Alan Moore. He has worked on horror titles such as "Night of the Living Dead," "Friday the 13th," and "Escape of the Living Dead." His work on supernatural tales continued with his writing credits on Warren Ellis' many "Gravel" comics, and Garth Ennis' "Stitched," both of which he also illustrated. Wolfer assumed scripting "Stitched" in September 2012, writing issues #8-19, which were illustrated by Fernando Furukawa.  In 2013, he illustrated the four-issue "Skin Trade," the comic adaptation of the George R.R. Martin werewolf epic. He has also worked for Avatar's sister company, Boundless Comics, where he wrote both Brian Pulido's "Lady Death" and "War Goddess."
"Lady Death" was nominated for "Sexist Or Racist Or Homophobic Comic Of The Year" at the 2011 C2E2 Bleeding Cool Awards, but because of his conviction to honor both the character and her creator (Brian Pulido), Wolfer went on record, stating that he viewed the Awards nomination as a joke which only generated more recognition for the property, and that anyone who had actually READ the book would know that it was the polar opposite of "sexist."
In May 2014, Wolfer launched a very successful Kickstarter campaign to fund the production of a new self-published graphic novel, "The Curse Of Ragdoll." The 96-page story had originally seen print in Avatar Press' adults-only title "Raw Media Quarterly." Wolfer wanted to bring the lush, Gothic horror story back to life and make it accessible to a wider audience, so he excised all of the x-rated material and replaced it with new panels, completely rewrote the story, and inserted 17 new pages of material. A Kickstarter campaign to fund the sequel, "Ragdoll: Orgy Of The Vampires," is scheduled for early 2015.
In July 2016, Wolfer began writing an authorized comic book sequel The Land That Time Forgot. The book was drawn by Giancarlo Caracuzzo and published by American Mythology Productions. In the first issue, Wolfer says the publisher approached him to write it because they had heard he was a big fan of the novel by Edgar Rice Burroughs.
(Excluding titles he did pencils)
Fangs of the Widow ('Avatar Press' 1995)
(Excluding titles he did interior art)
